{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Light;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red28\green28\blue28;\red255\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;\csgray\c100000;\csgenericrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\csgray\c100000;
\cssrgb\c14510\c14510\c14510;\csgenericrgb\c100000\c0\c0;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12160\viewh13040\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Report Jakob Unneb\'e4ck ABB Industrigymnasium 1401 2016-11-17\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE\
\
	\'95	COUNTRY & TOWN/CITY \
\
		Switzerland is a country situated in Central Europe adjacent to France, Germany, Italy, Austria and Liechtenstein. The capital city is Bern even though \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Z\'fcrich is bigger.\cf0 \cb4 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0  It has a population of over 8 million people and the official languages are German, French, Italian and Romansh. Having so many official languages strongly effects the country as many people speak different languages depending on the region and situation. Therefore it is mandatory to learn two of the official languages in school as well as English.\
\
		The country is divided into 26 cantons with Bern as seat of the federal \cf5 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
authorities. Together the cantons make up an area of 41,285\'a0km\super 2\nosupersub  with a max north to south distance of 220km.\cf0 \cb4 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
		I was placed in the town of Rheinfelden just beside the German border defined by the river Rhine and not far from France. Rheinfelden is a small town with 11 596 inhabitants. The town mostly consist of big apartment buildings and tightly placed houses. The area serves mostly as a residential area and it seems as though most people transit from there every morning. \
\
		From Rheinfelden there is a 1 hour train ride to Zurich which also stops in places like Baden and Brugg. My daily commute consisted of a buss ride to the train station followed by a 30 minutes train ride to Brugg where a finally switched to a train going to my workplace in Birr. It becomes very apparent that the train infrastructure is very well developed and you can basically go anywhere by train. The trains are always very punctual which is crucial for this type of structure. \
\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}INTRODUCTION (aim of this report, brief info about our school/education, why/how you chose your destination)\
\pard\tx566\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 		\
		This report will help to give insight into the professional aspects of Switzerland as well as the cultural. I will 		take a closer look of the education system and through Libs as well as a lean evaluation to discover ways 		the company can improve. \
\
		Choosing my destination for my journey was not an easy decision. The environment and nature has always 		been very important so I knew I wanted to go to a country with beautiful scenery. Me and another friend 		set our goal for Iceland but as it turned out it was hard to get a internship there. As time passed I needed 		to open up to other possibilities and I came across Switzerland. A snowy, hilly country famous for 			chocolate. I had found my destination.\
	\
	\
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}WORK & LEAN \
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 (Company, products/services, tasks, working hours, work environment, hierarchy, equality and gender e.g. career possibilities, pay gap, maternity leave and child-care policies). Compare with your experiences in Sweden.\
\
Company\
\
I worked at the company \cf5 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
libs Industrielle Berufslehren Schweiz\cf0 \cb4 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0  which is a school focused on practical studies for future work applications. Their vision is to help students to be professional learners and to utilise each students full potential. \
\
One thing thats very different from here in Sweden is the fact that the students or apprentices as they are called go in school for 2 days and then work 3 days with their respective profession. That gives the students a unique work experience compared to other schools and gives them a way to ease in to the full work life that will eventually follow. \
\
Working hours\
\
At the Libs the student\'92s have longer days then back in Sweden. The day starts at 7 am and ends at 4 pm. Beyond that they also have shorter breaks adding up to a total of only 55 minutes. That results in 8 hours and 5 minutes of work per day compared to Swedens measly 6 hours and 20 minutes.\
\
Environment\
\
I had my internship at the electrical department of Libs where the students learn about relays, plcs, pneumatics, components, building circuits and so on. Each student gets his/her own workbench with a load out of useful tools like wrenches, screwdrivers and pliers. The students then retrieves the material needed for their project. Everyone works in their own tempo and it was not uncommon to see five people each quietly at their bench working at completely different things.\
\
Hierarchy\
\
The students are guided by mentors who give out and supervises the tasks at hand. They evaluate the students work and verbal presentations of the task is quite common. Whats key here is that the mentors tailors a work plan for every specific student after their individual needs. During the whole education programme there is a few selected categories with assignments that every student have to finish. This can however be done in any order. That way student can have way more authority over what they work with at the moment compared to Sweden.\
\
The fact that the teachers has the title mentors is also reflected in the way they work. You learn by doing and the mentors are more like a guide helping you get back on the right track rather than teaching you straight away. \
\
Gender equality\
\
At the workplace in Birr where I was situated there are no girls taking the automation technician class. This however is not due to any gender rules but rather a lack of interest among girls. \
\
Career possibilities\
\
The education plan at Libs stretches across 4 years the 2 first being work at school and then the 2 last an internship at a company like ABB, Siemens, General Electrics and so on. After the 4 years the students are guaranteed a job in their area of expertise. \
\
\
LEAN\
\
Lean is a way of working with a company\'92s effectivity by visualising and eliminating waste. During my stay I  made som observations both good and bad.\
\

\f1\b Good
\f0\b0 \
\
Brakes are very punctual and students honour the schedule.\
\
The students work really intense during work hour and do not slack off or chat with co-workers.\
\
Breaks during the day are very short which increases the time available. The only downside by this is that the students might find it hard to relax during breaks.\
\

\f1\b Bad
\f0\b0 \
\
A really long time is spent on cleaning which does not produce any product. Keeping the workplace organised is very important in lean but because the long time available for cleaning people work in a very slow phase. This could be solved by adding schedules for the different areas that needs to be cleaned to make everyone responsible for a specific task.\
\
There is a lot of tasks with very repetitive work which does not teach the student anything more but just takes time.\
\
\cf6 A lot of the task include follow instructions which there is a lack of assignments including problem solving and working out solutions by yourself. \cf0 \
\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}CROSS CULTURAL ASPECTS:\
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0       IDEAS OF WHAT TO OBSERVE \
            e.g. Social interaction, gestures, body language, expressing politeness, respect,\
            punctuality.\
\
	One of the most interesting cultural differences between Sweden and Switzerland quickly turned out to 	simply be the lack of them.\
\
	Switzerland seems to share a lot of the things I always regarded as typical Swedish like avoiding sitting 	next to another person on the buss or train, keeping distance on the platform while waiting and the level of 	politeness when meeting stranger at places like the workplace.\
\
	One big difference however is how accepted smoking is. In Sweden smoking is disregarded by many and 	for those who smoke they have a responsibility to move away from others. In Switzerland smoking is very 	common and it was not uncommon to see somebody taking a smoke at the seat next to you on the station 	causing you to need to move.\
\
	Punctuality when it comes to schedules is also way more important in Switzerland as stated above with the 	breaks. In Sweden it\'92s normal to stop and talk to your friends if you pass them in the hall or maybe sit a 	minute or two extra in the break room to finish a discussion.\
\
	\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}CONCLUSION (What have you learnt? What has the internship meant to you? Improvement suggestions?)\
\pard\tx566\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
	These 3 weeks has been an experience like none other. I have gotten the privilege to stay at a Swiss family experiencing the Swiss way of life. Even though it was a pain to wake up at 6 in the morning just to commute for one and a half hour I will still miss it. The scenery was pretty incredible and it almost made up for the lack of WiFi on the train.\
\
During my stay I got to visit Mt Rigi, Zurich Zoo, Europa Park, Laser Tag and many many more. Iv\'92e visited 3 new countries being Switzerland, France and Germany and all of this is something that will stay with me for the rest of my life.\
\
I want to thank my kind host family in Switzerland and I wish them the best!\
\
Links:\
\
http://www.edk.ch/dyn/16342.php\
https://sv.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schweiz\
\
}